<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
<head>
  <title>Les Fleurs du Mal</title>
  <link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
  <link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
  <section id="les-fleurs-du-mal" epub:type="part">
	<h3 epub:type="title">Les Fleurs du Mal</h3>
	<article id="destruction" epub:type="z3998:poem">
	  <h4 epub:type="title">
		<span epub:type="z3998:roman">CIX</span>
		<span epub:type="subtitle">Destruction</span>
	  </h4>
	  <p>
		<span>Always the Demon fidgets here beside me</span>
		<br/>
		<span>And swims around, impalpable as air:</span>
		<br/>
		<span>I drink him, feel him burn the lungs inside me</span>
		<br/>
		<span>With endless evil longings and despair.</span>
	  </p>
	  <p>
		<span>Sometimes, knowing my love of Art, he uses</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Seductive forms of women: and has thus,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>With specious, hypocritical excuses,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Accustomed me to philtres infamous.</span>
	  </p>
	  <p>
		<span>Leading me wayworn into wastes untrod</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Of boundless Boredom, out of sight of God,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Using all baits to compass my abduction,</span>
	  </p>
	  <p>
		<span>Into my eyes, confused and full of woe,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Soiled clothes and bleeding gashes he will throw</span>
		<br/>
		<span>And all the grim regalia of Destruction.</span>
	  </p>
	</article>

	<article id="the-martyr" epub:type="z3998:poem">
	  <header>
		<h4 epub:type="title">
		  <span epub:type="z3998:roman">CX</span>
		  <span epub:type="subtitle">The Martyr</span>
		</h4>
		<p epub:type="bridgehead">(Drawing by an Unknown Master)</p>
	  </header>
	  <p>
		<span>Amongst gilt fabrics, flasks of scent and wine,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Rich furniture, white marble, precious moulds.</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Fine paintings, and rich, perfumed robes that shine</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Swirled into sumptuous folds,</span>
	  </p>
	  <p>
		<span>In a warm room, that like a hot-house stifles</span>
		<br/>
		<span>With dangerous and fatal breath, where lie</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Pale flowers in crystal tombs, exquisite trifles,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Exhaling their last sigh—</span>
	  </p>
	  <p>
		<span>A headless corpse, cascading in a flood</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Hot, living blood, that soaks, with crimson stain</span>
		<br/>
		<span>A pillow slaked and sated with blood</span>
		<br/>
		<span>As any field with rain.</span>
	  </p>
	  <p>
		<span>Like those pale visions which the gloom aborts</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Which fix us in a still, hypnotic stare,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>The head, tricked out with gems of sorts,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>In its huge mass of hair,</span>
	  </p>
	  <p>
		<span>Like a ranunculous beside the bed,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Rests on the table, empty of all thought.</span>
		<br/>
		<span>From eyes revulsed, like twilight, seems to spread</span>
		<br/>
		<span>A gaze that looks at naught,</span>
	  </p>
	  <p>
		<span>Upon the bed the carcase, unabashed,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Shows, in complete abandon, without shift,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>The secret splendour that, in life, it flashed</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Superbly, Nature's gift.</span>
	  </p>
	  <p>
		<span>A rosy stocking, freaked with clocks of gold,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Clings to one leg: a souvenir, it seems:</span>
		<br/>
		<span>The garter, from twin diamonds, with the cold</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Stare of a viper gleams.</span>
	  </p>
	  <p>
		<span>The singular effect of solitude</span>
		<br/>
		<span>And of a languorous portait, with its eyes</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Provocative as is its attitude,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Dark loves would advertise—</span>
	  </p>
	  <p>
		<span>And guilty joys, with feasts of strange delight,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Full of infernal kisses, omens certain</span>
		<br/>
		<span>To please the gloating angels of the Night</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Who swim behind each curtain.</span>
	  </p>
	  <p>
		<span>And yet to see her nimble strength, the risky</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Swerve of the rounded shoulder, and its rake,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>The tented haunch, the figure lithe and frisky,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Flexed like an angry snake,</span>
	  </p>
	  <p>
		<span>You'd know that she was young. Her soul affronted,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Her senses stung with boredom—were they bayed</span>
		<br/>
		<span>By packs of wandering, lost desires, and hunted,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>And finally betrayed?</span>
	  </p>
	  <p>
		<span>The vengeful man, whose lust you could not sate,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>(In spite of much love) nor quench his fire—</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Did he on your dead flesh then consummate</span>
		<br/>
		<span>His monstrous, last desire?—</span>
	  </p>
	  <p>
		<span>Answer me, corpse impure! With fevered fist,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Grim visage, did he raise you up on high,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>And, as your silver frosty teeth he kissed,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Bib you his last goodbye?</span>
	  </p>
	  <p>
		<span>Far from inquiring magistrates that sneer,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Far from this world of raillery and riot,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Sleep peacefully, strange creature, on your bier,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Of mystery and quiet.</span>
	  </p>
	  <p>
		<span>Your lover roams the world. Your deathless shape</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Watches his sleep and hears each indrawn breath.</span>
		<br/>
		<span>No more than you can he ever escape</span>
		<br/>
		<span>From constancy till death!</span>
	  </p>
	</article>

	<article id="damned-women" epub:type="z3998:poem">
	  <h4 epub:type="title">
		<span epub:type="z3998:roman">CXI</span>
		<span epub:type="subtitle">Damned Women</span>
	  </h4>
	  <p>
		<span>Like pensive cattle lying on the sand</span>
		<br/>
		<span>They scan the far horizon of the ocean,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Foot seeking foot, hand magnetising hand,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>With sweet or bitter tremors of emotion.</span>
	  </p>
	  <p>
		<span>Some with their hearts absorbed in confidences,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Deep in the woods, where streamlets chatter free,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Spell the loved names of childish, timid fancies,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>And carve the green wood of the fresh, young tree.</span>
	  </p>
	  <p>
		<span>Others, like sisters wander, slow, and grave,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Through craggy haunts of ghostly emanations,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Where once Saint Anthony was wont to brave</span>
		<br/>
		<span>The purple-breasted pride of his temptations.</span>
	  </p>
	  <p>
		<span>Some by the light of resin-scented torches</span>
		<br/>
		<span>In the dumb hush of caverns seek their shrine,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Invoking Bacchus, killer of remorses,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>To liven their delirium with wine.</span>
	  </p>
	  <p>
		<span>Others who deal with scapulars and hoods</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Hiding the whiplash under their long train,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Mingle, on lonely nights in sombre woods,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>The foam of pleasure with the tears of pain.</span>
	  </p>
	  <p>
		<span>O demons, monsters, virgins, martyrs, you</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Who trample base reality in scorn,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Whether as nuns or satyrs you pursue</span>
		<br/>
		<span>The infinite, with cries or tears forlorn,</span>
	  </p>
	  <p>
		<span>You, whom my soul has tracked to lairs infernal,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Poor sisterhood, I pity and adore,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>For your despairing griefs, your thirst eternal,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>And love that floods your hearts for evermore!</span>
	  </p>
	</article>

	<article id="the-two-good-sisters" epub:type="z3998:poem">
	  <h4 epub:type="title">
		<span epub:type="z3998:roman">CXII</span>
		<span epub:type="subtitle">The Two Good Sisters</span>
	  </h4>
	  <p>
	   <span>Debauchery and Death are pleasant twins,</span>
	   <br/>
	   <span>And lavish with their charms, a buxom pair!</span>
	   <br/>
	   <span>Under the rags that clothe their virgin skins,</span>
	   <br/>
	   <span>Their wombs, though still in labour, never bear.</span>
	  </p>
	  <p>
		<span>For the curst poet, foe to married rest,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>The friend of hell, and courtier on half-pay—</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Brothels and tombs reserve for such a guest</span>
		<br/>
		<span>A bed on which repentance never lay.</span>
	  </p>
	  <p>
		<span>Both tomb and bed, in blasphemy so fecund</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Each other's hospitality to second,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Prepare grim treats, and hatch atrocious things.</span>
	  </p>
	  <p>
		<span>Debauch, when will you bury me? When, Death,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Mingle your Cypress in the selfsame wreath</span>
		<br/>
		<span>With the infected Myrtles that she brings?</span>
	  </p>
	</article>

	<article id="the-fountain-of-blood" epub:type="z3998:poem">
	  <h4 epub:type="title">
		<span epub:type="z3998:roman">XCIII</span>
		<span epub:type="subtitle">The Fountain of Blood</span>
	  </h4>
	  <p>
		<span>My blood in waves seems sometimes to be spouting</span>
		<br/>
		<span>As though in rhythmic sobs a fountain swooned.</span>
		<br/>
		<span>I hear its long, low, rushing sound till, doubting,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>I feel myself all over for the wound.</span>
	  </p>
	  <p>
		<span>Across the town, as in the lists of battle,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>It flows, transforming paving stones to isles,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Slaking the thirst of creatures, men, and cattle,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>And colouring all nature red for miles.</span>
	  </p>
	  <p>
		<span>Sometimes I've sought relief in precious wines</span>
		<br/>
		<span>To lull in me the fear that undermines,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>But found they sharpened every sense the more.</span>
	  </p>
	  <p>
		<span>I've also sought forgetfulness in lust,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>But love's a bed of needles, and they thrust</span>
		<br/>
		<span>To give more drink to each rapacious whore.</span>
	  </p>
	</article>

	<article id="allegory" epub:type="z3998:poem">
	  <h4 epub:type="title">
		<span epub:type="z3998:roman">CXIV</span>
		<span epub:type="subtitle">Allegory</span>
	  </h4>
	  <p>
		<span>She is a woman of appearance fine</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Who lets her tresses trail into her wine.</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Love's claws and poisons, brewed in sinks of sin,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Fall blunted from the granite of her skin.</span>
		<br/>
		<span>She mocks Debauchery, Death leaves her blithe,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Two monsters always handy with the scythe.</span>
		<br/>
		<span>In their grim games, where so much beauty's wrecked,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>They treat her majesty with due respect.</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Half goddess, half sultana, without scathe,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>In pleasure she's a Moslem's steady faith.</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Between her open arms, filled by her breasts,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>For all mankind with burning eyes she quests,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>And she blieves, this fruitless virgin-wife,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Who's yet so necessary to this life,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>That beauty of the body is a gift</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Sublime enough all infamy to shift,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>And win forgiveness. She knows naught of Hell.</span>
		<br/>
		<span>When the Night comes, in which she is to dwell,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Straight in the face she'll look her deadly Fate,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Like one new-born—without remorse or hate.</span>
	  </p>
	</article>

	<article id="beatrice" epub:type="z3998:poem">
	  <h4 epub:type="title">
		<span epub:type="z3998:roman">CXV</span>
		<span epub:type="subtitle">Beatrice</span>
	  </h4>
	  <p>
		<span>In charred and ashen fields without a leaf,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>While I alone to Nature told my grief,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>I sharpened, as I went, like any dart,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>My thought upon the grindstone of my heart—</span>
		<br/>
		<span>When by a troop of vicious demons led,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>A great black cloud rushed down towards my head.</span>
		<br/>
		<span>As loafers at a lunatic they leered</span>
		<br/>
		<span>And in my face inquisitively peered.</span>
		<br/>
		<span>With nods and signs, like dwarfed and apish elves,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>They laughed, and winked, and spoke among themselves.</span>
	  </p>
	  <p>
		<span>"This parody of Hamlet, take his measure,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>And contemplate the travesty at leisure.</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Is it not sad to see the puzzled stare,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>The halting gait, and the dishevelled hair</span>
		<br/>
		<span>With which this clownish actor, on half-pay,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Because he is an artist in his way,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Attempts to interest, in the griefs he sings,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Eagles, and crickets, flowers, and running springs,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>And even us, the authors of his woe,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Howling his sorrows as a public show?"</span>
	  </p>
	  <p>
		<span>I could have dominated with my pride</span>
		<br/>
		<span>That horde of demons and the taunts they cried,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Just by the mere aversion of my face—</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Had I not seen, amongst that evil race,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>(A crime that did not even daze the sun!)</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Queen of my heart, the peerless, only one,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>Laughing with them to see my dark distress,</span>
		<br/>
		<span>And giving them, at times, some lewd caress.</span>
	  </p>
	</article>
  </section>
</body>
</html>

<!-- 
4 line stanza
	 <p>
	   <span></span>
	   <br/>
	   <span></span>
	   <br/>
	   <span></span>
	   <br/>
	   <span></span>
	 </p>

8 line stanza
	 <p>
	   <span></span>
	   <br/>
	   <span></span>
	   <br/>
	   <span></span>
	   <br/>
	   <span></span>
	   <br/>
	   <span></span>
	   <br/>
	   <span></span>
	   <br/>
	   <span></span>
	   <br/>
	   <span></span>
	 </p>
-->
