<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
 <head>
	<title>Spleen et Idéal</title>
	<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
 </head>
 <body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
   <section id="spleen-et-idéal" epub:type="part">
	 <h3 epub:type="title">Spleen et Idéal</h3>
	 <article id="benediction" epub:type="z3998:poem">
	   <h4 epub:type="title">
		 <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>
		 <span epub:type="subtitle">Benediction</span>
	   </h4>
	   <p>
		 <span>When by an edict of the powers supreme</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>A poet’s born into this world’s drab space,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>His mother starts, in horror, to blaspheme</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Clenching her fists at God, who grants her grace.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>“Would that a nest of vipers I’d aborted</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Rather than this absurd abomination.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Cursed be the night of pleasures vainly sported</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>On which my womb conceived my expiation.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Since of all women I am picked by You</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>To be my Mate’s aversion and his shame:</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And since I cannot, like a billet-doux,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Consign this stunted monster to the flame,</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>I’ll turn the hatred, which You load on me,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>On the curst tool through which You work your spite,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And twist and stunt this miserable tree</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Until it cannot burgeon for the blight.”</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>She swallows down the white froth of her ire</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And, knowing naught of schemes that are sublime,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Deep in Gehenna, starts to lay the pyre</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>That’s consecrated to maternal crime.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Yet with an unseen Angel for protector</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>The outcast waif grows drunken with the sun,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And finds ambrosia, too, and rosy nectar</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>In all he eats or drinks, suspecting none.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>He sings upon his Via Crucis, plays</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>With winds, and with the clouds exchanges words:</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>The Spirit following his pilgrim-ways</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Weeps to behold him gayer than the birds.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Those he would love avoid him as in fear,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Or, growing bold to see one so resigned,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Compete to draw from him a cry or tear,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And test on him the fierceness of their kind.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>In food or drink that’s destined for his taste</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>They mix saliva foul with cinders black,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Drop what he’s touched with hypocrite distaste,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And blame themselves for walking in his track.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>His wife goes crying in the public way</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>—“Since fair enough he finds me to adore,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>The part of ancient idols I will play</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And gild myself with coats of molten ore.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>I will get drunk on incense, myrrh, and nard,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>On genuflexions, meat, and heady wine.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Out of his crazed and wondering regard,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>I’ll laugh to steal prerogatives divine.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>When by such impios farces bored at length,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>I’ll place my frail strong hand on him, and start,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>With nails like those of harpies in their strength,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>To plough myself a pathway to his heart.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Like a young bird that trembles palpitating,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>I’ll wrench his heart, all crimson, from his chest,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And to my favourite beast, his hunger sating,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Will fling it in the gutter with a jest.”</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Skyward, to where he sees a Throne blaze splendid,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>The pious Poet lifts his arms on high,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And the vast lightnings of his soul extended</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Blot out the crowds and tumults from his eye.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>“Blessèd be You, O God, who give us pain,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>As cure for our impurity and wrong⁠—</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Essence that primes the stalwart to sustain</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Seraphic raptures that were else too strong.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>I know that for the Poet You’ve a post,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Where the blest Legions take their ranks and stations,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Invited to the revels with the host</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Of Virtues, Powers, and Thrones, and Dominations.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>That grief’s the sole nobility, I know it,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Where neither Earth nor Hell can make attacks,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And that, to deck my mystic crown of poet,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>All times and universes paid their tax.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>But all the gems from old Palmyra lost,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>The ores unmixed, the pearls of the abyss,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Set by Your hand, could not suffice the cost</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Of such a blazing diadem as this.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Because it will be only made of light,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Drawn from the hearth of the essential rays,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>To which our mortal eyes, when burning bright,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Are but the tarnished mirrors that they glaze.”</span>
	   </p>
	 </article>

	 <article id="the-albatross" epub:type="z3998:poem">
	   <h4 epub:type="section">
		 <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>
		 <span epub:type="subtitle">The Albatross</span></h4>
	   <p>
		 <span>Sometimes for sport the men of loafing crews</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Snare the great albatrosses of the deep,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>The indolent companions of their cruise</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>As through the bitter vastitudes they sweep.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Scarce have they fished aboard these airy kings</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>When helpless on such unaccustomed floors,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>They piteously droop their huge white wings</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And trail them at their sides like drifting oars.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>How comical, how ugly, and how meek</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Appears this soarer of celestial snows!</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>One, with his pipe, teases the golden beak,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>One, limping, mocks the cripple as he goes.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>The Poet, like this monarch of the clouds,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Despising archers, rides the storm elate.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>But, stranded on the earth to jeering crowds,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>The great wings of the giant baulk his gait.</span>
	   </p>
	 </article>

	 <article id="elevation" epub:type="z3998:poem">
	   <h4 epub:type="title">
		 <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>
		 <span epub:type="subtitle">Elevation</span>
	   </h4>
	   <p>
		 <span>Above the valleys and the lakes: beyond</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>The woods, seas, clouds, and mountain-ranges: far</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Above the sun, the aethers silver swanned</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>With nebulae, and the remotest star,</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>My spirit! with agility you move</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Like a strong swimmer with the seas to fight,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Through the blue vastness furrowing your groove</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>With an ineffable and male delight.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Far from these foetid marshes, be made pure</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>In the pure air of the superior sky,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And drink, like some most exquisite liqueur,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>The fire that fills the lucid realms on high.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Beyond where cares or boredom hold dominion,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Which charge our fogged existence with their spleen,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Happy is he who with a stalwart pinion</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Can seek those fields so shining and serene:</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Whose thoughts, like larks, rise on the freshening breeze,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Who fans the morning with his tameless wings,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Skims over life, and understands with ease</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>The speech of flowers and other voiceless things.</span>
	   </p>
	 </article>

	 <article id="correspondences" epub:type="z3998:poem">
	   <h4 epub:type="title">
		 <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>
		 <span epub:type="subtitle">Correspondences</span>
	   </h4>
	   <p>
		 <span>Nature's a temple where each living column,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>At times, gives forth vague words. There Man advances</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Through forest-groves of symbols, strange and solemn,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Who follow him with their familiar glances.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>As long-drawn echoes mingle and transfuse</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Till in a deep, dark unison they swoon,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Vast as the night or as the vault of noon—</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>So are commingled perfumes, sounds, and hues.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>There can be perfumes cool as children's flesh,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Like fiddles, sweet, like meadows greenly fresh.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Rich, complex, and triumphant, others roll</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>With the vast range of all non-finite things—</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Amber, musk, incense, benjamin, each sings</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>The transports of the senses and the soul.</span>
	   </p>
	 </article>

	 <article id="i-love-the-thought-of-those-old-naked-days" epub:type="z3998:poem">
	   <h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">V</h4>
	   <p>
		 <span>I love the thought of those old naked days</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>When Phoebus gilded torsos with his rays,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>When men and women sported, strong and fleet,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Without anxiety or base deceit,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And heaven caressed them, amorously keen</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>To prove the health of each superb machine.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Cybele then was lavish of her guerdon</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And did not find her sons too gross a burden:</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>But, like a she-wolf, in her love great-hearted,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Her full brown teats to all the world imparted.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Bold, handsome, strong Man, rightly, might evince</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Pride in the glories that proclaimed him prince—</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Fruits pure of outrage, by the blight unsmitten,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>With firm, smooth flesh that cried out to be bitten.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Today the Poet, when he would assess</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Those native splendours in the nakedness</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Of man or woman, feels a sombre chill</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Enveloping his spirit and his will.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>He meets a gloomy picture, which he loathes,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Wherin deformity cries out for clothes.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Oh comic runts! of horror of burlesque!</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Lank, flabby, skewed, pot-bellied, and grotesque!</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Whom their smug god, Utility (poor brats!)</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Has swaddled in his brazen clouts "ersatz"</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>As with cheap tinsel. Women tallow-pale,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Both gnawed and nourished by debauch, who trail</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>The heavy burden of maternal vice,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Or of fecundity the hideous price.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>We have (corrupted nations) it is true</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Beauties the ancient people never knew—</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Sad faces gnawed by cancers of the heart</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And charms which morbid lassitudes impart.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>But these inventions of our tardy muse</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Can't force our ailing peoples to refuse</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Just tribute to the holiness of youth</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>With its straightforward mien, its forhead couth,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>The limpid gaze, like running water brigh,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Diffusing, careless, through all things, like the light</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Of azure skies, the birds, the winds, the flowers,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>The songs, and perfumes, and heart-warming powers.</span>
	 </p>
	 </article>
	 
	 <article id="the-beacons" epub:type="z3998:poem">
	   <h4 epub:type="title">
		 <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VI</span>
		 <span epub:type="subtitle">The Beacons</span>
	   </h4>
	   <p>
		 <span>Rubens, the grove of ease, Nepenthe's river</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Couch of cool flesh, where Love may never be,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>But where life ever flows and seems to quiver</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>As air in heaven, or, in the sea, the sea.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Da Vinci, dusky mirror and profound,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Where angels, smiling mystery, appear,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Shaded by pines and glaciers, that surround</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And seem to shut their country in the rear.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Rembrandt, sad hospital of murmurs, where</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Adorned alone by one great crucifix,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>From offal-heaps exhales the weeping prayer</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>That winter shoots a sunbeam to transfix.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Vague region, Michaelangelo, where Titans</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Are mixed with Christs: and strong ghosts rise, in crowds, </span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>To stand bold upright in the gloom that lightens,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>With gristly talons tearing through their shrouds.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Rage of the boxer, mischief of the faun,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Extracting beauty out of blackguards' looks—</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>The heart how proud, the man how pinched and drawn—</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Puget the mournful emperor of crooks!</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Watteau, the carnival, where famous hearts</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Go flitting by like butterflies that burn,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>While through gay scenes each chandelier imparts</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>A madness to the dancers as they turn.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Goya's a nightmare full of things unguessed,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Of foeti stewed on nights of witches' revels.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Crones ogle mirrors; children scarcely dressed,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Adjust their hose to tantalise the devils.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>A lake of gore where fallen angels dwell</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Is Delacroix, by firwoods ever fair,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Where under fretful skies strange fanfares swell</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Like Weber's sighs and heartbeats in the air.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>These curses, blasphemies, and lamentations,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>These ecstasies, tears, cries and soaring psalms—</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Through endless mazes, their reverberations</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Bring, to our mortal hearts, divinest balms.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>A thousand sentinels repeat the cry.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>A thousand trumpets echo. Beacon-tossed</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>A thousand summits flare it through the sky,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>A call of hunters in the jungle lost.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>And certainly this is the most sublime</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Proof of our worth and value, Oh Divinity,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>That this great sob rolls on through ageless time</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>To die upon the shores of your infinity.</span>
	   </p>
	 </article>

	 <article id="the-sick-muse" epub:type="z3998:poem">
	   <h4 epub:type="title">
		 <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VII</span>
		 <span epub:type="subtitle">The Sick Muse</span>
	   </h4>
	   <p>
		 <span>Alas, poor Muse, what ails you so today?</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Your hollow eyes with midnight visions burn,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And turn about, in your complexion play</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Madness and horror, cold and taciturn.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Green succubus and rosy imp—have they</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Poured you both fear and love into one glass?</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Or with his tyrant fist the nightmare, say,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Submerged you in some fabulous morass?</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>I wish that, breathing health, your breast might nourish</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Ever robuster thoughts therein to flourish:</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And that your Christian blood, in rythmic flow,</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>With those old polysyllables would chime,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Where, turn about, reigned Phoebus, sire of rhyme,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And Pan, the lord of harvests long ago.</span>
	   </p>
	 </article>
	 
	 <article id="the-venal-muse" epub:type="z3998:poem">
	   <h4 epub:type="title">
		 <span epub:type="z3998:roman">VIII</span>
		 <span epub:type="subtitle">The Venal Muse</span>
	   </h4>
	   <p>
		 <span>Muse of my heart, of palaces the lover,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Where will you, when the blast of winter blows,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>In the black boredom of snowed lights, discover</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>A glowing brand to warm your violet toes?</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>How will you there revive your marbled skin</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>At the chill rays your shutters then disperse?</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>The gold of azure heavens will you win</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>When empty are your palate and your purse?</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>You'll need each evening, then, to earn your bread</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>As choirboys swinging censers that are dead</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Who sing Te Deums which they disbelieve:</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Or, fasting pierrette, trade your loveliness</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And laughter, soaked in tears that none can guess,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>The boredom of the vulgar to relieve.</span>
	   </p>
	 </article>

	 <article id="the-evil-monk" epub:type="z3998:poem">
	   <h4 epub:type="title">
		 <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IX</span>
		 <span epub:type="subtitle">The Evil Monk</span>
	   </h4>
	   <p>
		 <span>The walls of cloisters on their frescoed lath</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Displayed, in pictures, sacred truths of old,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Whose sight would warm the entrails of one's faith</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>To temper their austerity and cold.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>In times when every sowing flowered for Christ</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Lived famous monks, now out of memory's reach;</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>The graveyard for their library sufficed,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And Death was glorified in simple speech.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>My soul's a grave, where, evil cenobite,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>To all eternity I have been banned.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Nothing adorns this cloister full of spite.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>O idle monk! Say, to what end were planned</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>The living spectacle of my sad plight,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Love of my eye, or labour of my hand?</span>
	   </p>
	 </article>

	 <article id="the-enemy" epub:type="z3998:poem">
	   <h4 epub:type="title">
		 <span epub:type="z3998:roman">X</span>
		 <span epub:type="subtitle">The Enemy</span>
	   </h4>
	   <p>
		 <span>My youth was but a tempest, dark and savage,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Through which, at times, a dazzling sun would shoot.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>The thunder and the rain have made such ravage</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>My garden is nigh bare of rosy fruit.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Now I have reached the Autumn of my thought,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And spade and rake must toil the land to save,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>That fragments of my flooded fields be sought</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>From where the water sluices out a grave.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Who knows if the new flowers my dreams prefigure,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>In this washed soil should find, as by a sluit,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>The mystic nourishment to give them vigour?</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Time swallows up our life, O ruthless rigour!</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And the dark foe that nibbles our heart's root,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Grows on our blood the stronger and the bigger!</span>
	   </p>
	 </article>
	 
	 <article id="ill-luck" epub:type="z3998:poem">
	   <h4 epub:type="title">
		 <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XI</span>
		 <span epub:type="subtitle">Ill Luck</span>
	   </h4>
	   <p>
		 <span>So huge a burden to support</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Your courage, Sisyphus, would ask;</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Well though my heart attacks its task,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Yet Art is long and Time is short.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Far from the famed memorial arch</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Towards a lonely grave I come.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>My heart in its funereal march</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Goes beating like a muffled drum.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>—Yet many a gem lies hidden still</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Of whom no pick-axe, spade, or drill</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>The lonely secrecy invades;</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>And many a flower, to heal regret,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Pours forth its fragrant secret yet</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Amidst the solitary shades.</span>
	 </p>
	 </article>

	 <article id="former-life" epub:type="z3998:poem">
	   <h4 epub:type="title">
		 <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XII</span>
		 <span epub:type="subtitle">Former Life</span>
	   </h4>
	   <p>
		 <span>I've lived beneath huge portals where marine</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Suns coloured, with a myriad fires, the waves;</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>At eve majestic pillars made the scene</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Resemble those of vast basaltic caves.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>The breakers, rolling the reflected skies,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Mixed, in a solemn, enigmatic way,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>The powerful symphonies they seem to play</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>With colours of the sunset in my eyes.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>There did I live in a voluptuous calm</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Where breezes, waves, and splendours roved as vagrants;</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And naked slaves, impregnated with fragrance,</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Would fan my forehead with their fronds of palm:</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Their only charge was to increase the anguish</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Of secret grief in which I loved to languish.</span>
	   </p>
	 </article>
	 
	 <article id="gipsies-on-the-road" epub:type="z3998:poem">
	   <h4 epub:type="title">
		 <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIII</span>
		 <span epub:type="subtitle">Gipsies on the Road</span>
	   </h4>
	   <p>
		 <span>The tribe of seers, last night, began its march</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>With burning eyes, and shouldering its young</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>To whose ferocious appetites it swung</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>The wealth of hanging breasts that nought can parch.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>The men, their weapons glinting in the rays,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Walk by the convoy where their folks are carted,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Sweeping the far-off skylines with a gaze</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Regretful of Chimeras long-departed.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Out of his hole the cricket sees them pass</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And sings the louder. Greener grows the grass</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Because Cybele loves them, and has made</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>The barren rock to gush, the sands to flower,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>To greet these travellers, before whose power</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Familiar futures open realms of shade.</span>
	 </p>
	 </article>

	 <article id="man-and-the-sea" epub:type="z3998:poem">
	   <h4 epub:type="title">
		 <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIV</span>
		 <span epub:type="subtitle">Man and the Sea</span>
	   </h4>
	   <p>
		 <span>Free man, you'll always love the sea—for this,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>That it's a mirror, where you see your soul</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>In its eternal waves that chafe and roll;</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Nor is your soul less bitter an abyss.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>In your reflected image there to merge,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>You love to dive, its eyes and limbs to match.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Sometimes your heart forgets its own, to catch</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>The rhythm of that wild and tameless dirge.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>The two of you are shadowy, deep, and wide.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Man! None has ever plummeted your floor—</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Sea! None has ever known what wealth you store</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Both are so jealous of the things you hide!</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Yet age on age is ended, or begins,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>While you without remorse or pity fight.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>So much in death and carnage you delight,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Eternal wrestlers! Unrelenting twins!</span>
	 </p>
	 </article>

	 <article id="don-juan-in-hell" epub:type="z3998:poem">
	   <h4 epub:type="title">
		 <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XV</span>
		 <span epub:type="subtitle">Don Juan in Hell</span>
	   </h4>
	   <p>
		 <span>When, having reached the subterranean wave,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Don Juan paid his passage from the shore,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Proud as Antisthenes, a surly knave</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>With vengeful arms laid hold of either oar.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>With hanging breasts between their mantles showing</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Sad women, writhing under the black sky,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Made, as they went, the sound of cattle lowing</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>As from a votive herd that's led to die.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Sganarelle for his wages seemed to linger,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And laughed; while to the dead assembled there,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Don Luis pointed out with trembling finger</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>The son who dared to flout his silver hair.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Chilled in her crêpe, the chaste and thin Elvira,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Standing up close to her perfidious spouse,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Seemed to be pleading from her old admirer</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>For that which thrilled his first, unbroken vows.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>A great stone man in armour leaped aboard;</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Seizing the helm, the coal-black wave he cleft.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>But the calm hero, leaning on his sword,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Had eyes for nothing but the wake they left.</span>
	 </p>
	 </article>

	 <article id="the-punishment-of-pride" epub:type="z3998:poem">
	   <h4 epub:type="title">
		 <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVI</span>
		 <span epub:type="subtitle">The Punishment of Pride</span>
	   </h4>
	   <p>
		 <span>When first Theology in her young prime</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Flourished with vigour, in that wonderous time,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Of an illustrious Doctor it was said</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>That, having forced indifferent hearts to shed</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Tears of emotion, moved to depths profound:</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And having to celestial glory found</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Marvellous paths, to his own self unknown,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Where only purest souls had fared alone—</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Like a man raised too high, as in a panic,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Crazed with a vertigo of pride satanic,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>He cried "Poor Christ, I've raised you to renown!</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>But had I wished to bring you crashing down</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Probing your flaws, your shame would match your pride</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And you'd be but a foetus to deride!"</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Immediately he felt his wits escape,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>That flash of sunlight veiled itself in crêpe.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>All chaos through his intellect was rolled,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>A temple once, containing hoards of gold,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>By opulence and order well controlled,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And topped with ceilings splendid to behold.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Silence and night installed their reign in him.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>It seemed he was a cellar dank and dim,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>To which no living man could find the key;</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And from that day a very beast was he.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And while he wandered senseless on his way,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Not knowing spring from summer, night from day,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Foul, dirty, useless, and with no hereafter,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>He served the children as a butt for laughter.</span>
	   </p>
	 </article>
	 
	 <article id="beauty" epub:type="z3998:poem">
	   <h4 epub:type="title">
		 <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVII</span>
		 <span epub:type="subtitle">Beauty</span>
	   </h4>
	   <p>
		 <span>I'm fair, O mortals, as a dream of stone;</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>My breasts whereon, in turn, your wrecks you shatter,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Were made to wake in poets' hearts alone</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>A love as indestructible as matter.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>A sky-throned sphinx, unknown yet, I combine</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>The cygnet's whiteness with a heart of snow.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>I loathe all movement that displaces line,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And neither tears nor laughter do I know</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Poets before my postures, which I seem</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>To learn from masterpieces, love to dream</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And there in austere thought consume their days.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>I have, these docile lovers to subject,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Mirrors that glorify all they reflect—</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>These eyes, great eyes, eternal in their blaze!</span>
	    </p>
	 </article>

	 <article id="the-ideal" epub:type="z3998:poem">
	   <h4 epub:type="title">
		 <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XVIII</span>
		 <span epub:type="subtitle">The Ideal</span>
	   </h4>
	   <p>
		 <span>It's not with smirking beauties of vignettes,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>The shopsoiled products of a worthless age,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>With buskined feet and hands for castañets—</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>A heart like mine its longing could assuage.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>I leave Gavarni, poet of chloroses,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>His twittering flock, anaemic and unreal.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>I could not find among such bloodless roses,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>A flower to match my crimson-hued ideal.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>To this heart deeper than the deepest canyon,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Lady Macbeth would be a fit companion,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Crime-puissant dream of Aeschylus; or you,</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Daughter of Buonarroti, stately Night!</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Whose charms to suit a Titan's appetite,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>You twist, so strange, yet peaceful, to the view.</span>
	   </p>
	 </article>

	 <article id="the-giantess" epub:type="z3998:poem">
	   <h4 epub:type="title">
		 <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XIX</span>
		 <span epub:type="subtitle">The Giantess</span>
	   </h4>
	   <p>
		 <span>Of old when Nature, in her verve defiant,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Conceived each day some birth of monstrous mien,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>I would have lived near some young female giant</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Like a voluptuous cat beside a queen;</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>To see her body flowering with her soul</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Freely develop in her mighty games,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And in the mists that through her gaze would roll</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Guess that her heart was hatching sombre flames;</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>To roam her mighty contours as I please,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Ramp on the cliff of her tremendous knees,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And in the solstice, when the suns that kill</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Make her stretch out across the land and rest,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>To sleep beneath the shadow of her breast</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Like a hushed village underneath a hill.</span>
	   </p>
	 </article>
	 
	 <article id="the-mask" epub:type="z3998:poem">
	   <header>
		 <h4 epub:type="title">
		   <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XX</span>
		   <span epub:type="subtitle">The Mask</span>
		 </h4>
		 <p epub:type="bridgehead">An allegoric statue in Renaissance style.</p>
		 <p epub:type="dedication"><b>To Ernest Christophe</b>, sculptor</p>
	   </header>
	   <p>
		 <span>Study with me this Florentinian treasure,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Whose undulous and muscular design</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Welds Grace with Strength in sisterhood divine;</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>A marvel only wonderment can measure</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Divinely strong, superbly slim and fine,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>She's formed to reign upon a bed of pleasure</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And charm some prince or pontiff in his leisure.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>See, too, her smile voluptuously shine,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Where sheer frivolity displays its sign:</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>That lingering look of langour, guile, and cheek,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>The dainty face, which veils of gauze enshrine,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>That seems in conquering accents thus to speak:</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>"Pleasure commands me. Love my brow has crowned!"</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Enamouring our thoughts in humble duty,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>True majesty with merriment is found.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Approach, let's take a turn about her beauty.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>O blasphemy! Dread shock! Our hopes to pique,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>This lovely body, promising delight,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Ends at the top in a two-headed freak.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>But no! it's just a mask that tricked our sight,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Fooling us with that exquisite grimace:</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>On the reverse you see her proper face,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Fiercely convulsed, in its true self revealed,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Which from our sight that lying mask concealed.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>—O sad great beauty! The grand river, fed</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>By your rich tears, debouches in my heart.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Though I am rapt with your deceptive art,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>My soul is slaked upon the tears you shed.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>And yet why does she weep? Such peerless grace</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Could trample down the conquered human race.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>What evil gnaws her flank so strong and sleek?</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>She weeps because she's lived, and that she lives.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Madly she weeps for that. But more she grieves</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>(And at the knees she trembles and goes weak)</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Because tomorrow she must live, and then</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>The next day, and forever—like us men.</span>
	   </p>
	 </article>

	 <article id="hymn-to-beauty" epub:type="z3998:poem">
	   <h4 epub:type="title">
		 <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXI</span>
		 <span epub:type="subtitle">Hymn to Beauty</span>
	   </h4>
	   <p>
		 <span>Did you spring out of heaven or the abyss,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Beauty? Your gaze infernal, yet divine,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Spreads infamy and glory, grief and bliss,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And therefore you can be compared to wine.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Your eyes contain both sunset and aurora:</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>You give off scents, like evenings storm-deflowered:</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Your kisses are a philtre: an amphóra</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Your mouth, that cows the brave, and spurs the coward.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Climb you from gulfs, or from the stars descend?</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Fate, like a fawning hound, to heel you've brought;</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>You scatter joy and ruin without end,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Ruling all things, yet answering for naught.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>You trample men to death, and mock their clamour.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Amongst your gauds pale Horor gleams and glances,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And Murder, not the least of them in glamour,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>On your proud belly amorously dances.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>The dazzled insect seeks your candle-rays,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Crackles, and burns, and seems to bless his doom.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>The groom bent o'er his bride as in a daze,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Seems, like a dying man, to stroke his tomb.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>What matter if from hell or heaven born,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Tremendous monster, terrible to view?</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Your eyes and smile reveal to me, like morn,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>The Infinite I love but never knew.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>From God or Fiend? Siren or Sylph? Invidious</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>The answer—Fay with eyes of velvet, ray,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Rhythm, and perfume!—if you make less hideous</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Our universe, less tedious leave our day.</span>
	   </p>
	 </article>

	 <article id="exotic-perfume" epub:type="z3998:poem">
	   <h4 epub:type="title">
		 <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXII</span>
		 <span epub:type="subtitle">Exotic Perfume</span>
	   </h4>
	   <p>
		 <span>When I, with eyes shut, on warm autumn eves,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>The fragrance of your warmer breast respire,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>I see a country bathed in solar fire</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Whose happy shores its lustre never leaves;</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>An isle of indolence, where nature raises</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Singular trees and fruits both sweet and tender,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Where men have bodies vigorous and slender</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And women's eyes a candour that amazes.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Led by your scent to fairer climes at last,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>I see a port of sails, where every mast</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Seems weary of the labours of its cruise;</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>While scents of tamarind, blown here and there,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Swelling my nostrils as they rinse the air,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Are mingled with the chanties of the crews.</span>
	 </p>
	 </article>

	 <article id="her-hair" epub:type="z3998:poem">
	   <h4 epub:type="title">
		 <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIII</span>
		 <span epub:type="subtitle">Her Hair</span>
	   </h4>
	   <p>
		 <span>O fleece that down her nape rolls, plume on plume!</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>O curls! O scent of nonchalance and ease!</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>What ecstacy! To populate this room</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>With memories it harbours in its gloom,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>I'd shake it like a banner on the breeze.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Hot Africa and languid Asia play</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>(An absent world, defunct, and far away)</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Within that scented forest, dark and dim.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>As other souls on waves of music swim,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Mine on its perfume sails, as on the spray.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>I'll journey there, where man and sap-filled tree</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Swoon in hot light for hours. Be you my sea,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Strong tresses! Be the breakers and gales</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>That waft me. Your black river holds, for me,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>A dream of masts and rowers, flames and sails.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>A port, resounding there, my soul delivers</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>With long deep draughts of perfumes, scent, and clamour,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Where ships, that glide through gold and purple rivers,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Fling wide their vast arms to embrace the glamour</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Of skies wherein the heat forever quivers.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>I'll plunge my head in it, half drunk with pleasure—</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>In this black ocean that engulfs her form.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>My soul, caressed with wavelets there may measure</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Infinite rockings in embalmèd leisure,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Creative idleness that fears no storm!</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Blue tresses, like a shadow-stretching tent,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>You shed the blue of heavens round and far.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Along its downy fringes as I went</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>I reeled half-drunken to confuse the scent</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Of oil of coconuts, with musk and tar.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>My hand forever in your mane so dense,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Rubies and pearls and sapphires there will sow,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>That you to my desire be never slow—</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Oasis of my dreams, and gourd from whence</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Deep-draughted wines of memory will flow.</span>
	   </p>
	 </article>

	 <article id="more-than-night's-vault" epub:type="z3998:poem">
	   <h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIV</h4>
	   <p>
		 <span>More than night's vault, it's you that I adore,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Vessel of sorrow, silent one, the more</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Because you flee from me, and seem to place,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Ornament of my nights! more leagues of space</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Ironically between me and you</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Than part me from these vastitudes of blue.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>I charge, attack, and mount to the assault</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>As morms attack a corpse within a vault.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And cherish even the coldness that you boast,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>By which, harsh beast, you subjugate me most.</span>
	   </p>
	 </article>

	 <article id="you'd-stick-the-world" epub:type="z3998:poem">
	   <h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XXV</h4>
	   <p>
		 <span>You'd stick the world into your bedside lane.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>It's boredom makes you callous to all pain.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>To exercise your teeth for this strange task,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>A heart upon a rake, each day, you'd ask.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Your eyes lit up like shopfronts, or the trees</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>With lanterns on the night of public sprees,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Make insolent misues of borrowed power</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And scorn the law of beauty that's their dower.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Oh deaf-and-dumb machine, harm-breeding fool</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>World sucking leech, yet salutary tool!</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Have you not seen your beauties blanch to pass</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Before their own reflection in the glass?</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Before this pain, in which you think you're wise,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Does not its greatness shock you with surprise,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>To think that Nature, deep in projects hidden,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Has chosen you, vile creature of the midden,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>To knead a genius for the succeeding time.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>O sordid grandeur! Infamy sublime!</span>
	   </p>
	 </article>

	 <article id="sed-non-satiata" epub:type="z3998:poem">
	   <h4 epub:type="title">
		 <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVI</span>
		 <span epub:type="subtitle"><i xml:lang="la">Sed non Satiata</i></span>
	   </h4>
	   <p>
		 <span>Strange goddess, brown as evening to the sight,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Whose scent is half of musk, half of havanah,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Work of some obi, Faust of the Savanah,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Ebony witch, and daughter of the night.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>By far preferred to troth, or drugs, or sleep,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Love vaunts the red elixir of your mouth.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>My caravan of longings seeks in drouth</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Your eyes, the wells at which my cares drink deep.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Through those black eyes, by which your soul respires,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Pitiless demon! pour less scorching fires.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>I am no Styx nine times with flame to wed.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Nor can I turn myself to Proserpine</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>To break your spell, Megera libertine!</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Within the dark inferno of your bed.</span>
	 </p>
	 </article>

	 <article id="with-waving-opalescence" epub:type="z3998:poem">
	   <h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVII</h4>
	   <p>
		 <span>With waving opalescence in her gown,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Even when she walks along, you think she's dancing.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Like those long snakes which charmers, while entrancing,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Wave with their wands, in cadence, up and down.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Like the sad sands of deserts and their skies,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>By human sufferings untouched and free,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Or like the surfy curtains of the sea,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>She flaunts a cold indifference. Her eyes</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Are made of charming minerals well-burnished.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Her nature, both by sphynx and angel furnished,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Is old, intact, symbolic, and bizarre:</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>She seems, made all of gems, steel, light, and gold,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>In barrenness, majestic, hard, and cold,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>To blaze forever, like a useless star.</span>
	 </p>
	 </article>

	 <article id="the-snake-that-dances" epub:type="z3998:poem">
	   <h4 epub:type="title">
		 <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXVIII</span>
		 <span epub:type="subtitle">The Snake that Dances</span>
	   </h4>
	   <p>
		 <span>I love to watch, while you are lazing,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span class="i1">Your skin. It iridesces</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Like silk or satin, smoothly-glazing</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span class="i1">The light that it caresses.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Under your tresses dark and deep</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span class="i1">Where acrid perfumes drown,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>A fragrant sea whose breakers sweep</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span class="i1">In mazes blue or brown,</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>My soul, a ship, to the attraction</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span class="i1">Of breezes that bedizen</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Its swelling canvas, clears for action</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span class="i1">And seeks a far horizon.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Your eyes where nothing can be seen</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span class="i1">Either of sweet or bitter</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>But gold and iron mix their sheen,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span class="i1">Seem frosty gems that glitter.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>To see you rhythmically advancing</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span class="i1">Seems to my fancy fond</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>As if it were a serpent dancing</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span class="i1">Waved by the charmer's wand.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Under the languorous moods that weigh it,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span class="i1">Your childish head bows down:</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Like a young elephant's you sway it</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span class="i1">With motions soft as down.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Your body leans upon the hips</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span class="i1">Like a fine ship that laves</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Its hull from side to side, and dips</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span class="i1">Its yards into the waves.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>When, as by glaciers ground, the spate</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span class="i1">Swells hissing from beneath,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>The water of your mouth, elate,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span class="i1">Rises between your teeth—</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>It seems some old Bohemian vintage</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span class="i1">Triumphant, fierce, and tart,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>A liquid heaven that showers a mintage</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span class="i1">Of stars across my heart.</span>
	 </p>
	 </article>

	 <article id="the-carcase" epub:type="z3998:poem">
	   <h4 epub:type="title">
		 <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXIX</span>
		 <span epub:type="subtitle">The Carcase</span>
	   </h4>
	   <p>
		 <span>The object that we saw, let us recall,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>This summer morn when warmth and beauty mingle—</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>At the path's turn, a carcase lay asprawl</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span class="i1">Upon a bed of shingle.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Legs raised, like some old whore far-gone in passion,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>The burning, deadly, poison-sweating mass,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Opened its paunch in careless, cynic fashion,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span class="i1">Ballooned with evil gas.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>On this putrescence the sun blazed in gold,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Cooking it to a turn with eager care—</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>So to repay to Nature, hundredfold,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span class="i1">What she had mingled there.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>The sky, as on the opening of a flower,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>On thhis superb obscenity smiled bright.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>The stench drove at us, with such fearsome power</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span class="i1">You thought you'd swoon outright.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Flies trumpeted upon the rotten belly</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Whence larvae poured in legions far and wide,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And flowed, like molten and liquescent jelly,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span class="i1">Down living rags of hide.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>The mass ran down, or, like a wave elated</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Rolled itself on, and crackled as if frying:</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>You'd think that corpse, by vague breath animated,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span class="i1">Drew life from multiplying.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Through that strange world a rustling rumour ran</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Like rushing water or a gust of air,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Or grain that winnowers, with rhythmic fan,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span class="i1">Sweep simmering here and there.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>It seemed a dream after the forms grew fainter,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Or like a sketch that slowly seems to dawn</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>On a forgotten canvas, which the painter</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span class="i1">From memory has drawn.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Behind the rocks a restless cur that slunk</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Eyed us with fretful greed to recommence</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>His feast, amidst the bonework, on the chunk</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span class="i1">That he had torn from thence.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Yet you'll resemble this infection too</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>One day, and stink and sprawl in such a fashion,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Star of my eyes, sun of my nature, you,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span class="i1">My angel and my passion!</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Yes, you must come to this, O queen of graces,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>At length, when the last sacraments are over,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And you go down to moulder in dark places</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span class="i1">Beneath the grass and clover.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Then tell the vermin as it takes its pleasance</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And feasts with kisses on that face of yours,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>I've kept intact in form and godlike essence</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span class="i1">Our decomposed amours!</span>
	   </p>
	 </article>

	 <article id="de-profundis-clamavi" epub:type="z3998:poem">
	   <h4 epub:type="title">
		 <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXX</span>
		 <span epub:type="subtitle"><i xml:lang="la">De Profundis Clamavi</i></span>
	   </h4>
	   <p>
		 <span>Have pity, my one love and sole delight!</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Down to a dark abyss my heart has sounded,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>A mournful world, by grey horizons bounded,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Where blasphemy and horror swim by night.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>For half the year a heatless sun gives light,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>The other half the night obscures the earth.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>The arctic regions never knew such dearth.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>No woods, nor streams, nor creatures meet the sight.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>No horror in the world could match in dread</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>The cruelty of that dire sun of frost,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And that huge night like primal chaos spread.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>I envy creatures of the vilest kind</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>That they in stupid slumber can be lost—</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>So slowly does the skein of time unwind!</span>
	   </p>
	 </article>

	 <article id="the-vampire" epub:type="z3998:poem">
	   <h4 epub:type="title">
		 <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXI</span>
		 <span epub:type="subtitle">The Vampire</span>
	   </h4>
	   <p>
		 <span>You, who like a dagger ploughed</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Into my heart with deadly thrill:</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>You who, stronger than a crowd</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Of demons, mad, and dressed to kill,</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Of my dejected soul have made</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Your bed, your lodging, and domain:</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>To whom I'm linked (Unseemly Jade!)</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>As is a convict to his chain,</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Or as the gamester to his dice,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Or as the drunkard to his dram,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Or as the carrion to its lice—</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>I curse you. Would my curse could damn!</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>I have besought the sudden blade</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>To win for me my freedom back.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Perfidious poison I have prayed</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>To help my cowardice. Alack!</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Both poison and the sword disdained</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>My cowardice, and seemed to say</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>"You are not fit to be unchained</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>From your damned servitude. Away,</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>You imbecile! since if from her empire</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>We were to liberate the slave,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>You'd raise the carrion of your vampire,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>By your own kisses, from the grave."</span>
	 </p>
	 </article>

	 <article id="one-night-when" epub:type="z3998:poem">
	   <h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXII</h4>
	   <p>
		 <span>One night when, near a fearful Jewess lying,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>As one corpse by another corpse, I sprawled—</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Beside the venal body I was buying,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>The beauty that was absent I recalled.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>I pictured you in native majesty</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>With glances full of energy and grace,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Your hair, a perfumed casque, whose memory</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Revives me for the amorous embrace.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>For madly I'd have kissed your noble frame,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And from your cool feet to your great black tresses</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Unleashed the treasure of profound caresses,</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>If with a single tear that gently came</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>You could have quenched, O queen of all the cruel!</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>The blazing of your eyes, their icy fuel.</span>
	 </p>
	 </article>

	 <article id="posthumous-remorse" epub:type="z3998:poem">
	   <h4 epub:type="title">
		 <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXIII</span>
		 <span epub:type="subtitle">Posthumous Remorse</span>
	   </h4>
	   <p>
		 <span>When you're asleep, dear shadow-coloured wench,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Within a coal-black, marble monument:</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>When, for your room and mansion, you are pent</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>In a wet cellar and a hollow trench:</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>When the stone, pressing on your startled breast</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And flanks in fluent suppleness competing,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Prevents your heart from wishing or from beating,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Your feet from racing on their reckless quest.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>The tomb that shares my deathless recollection</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>(For poets best are understood by tombs)</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>On those long nights, when never sleep presumes,</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Will say, "What boots, frail vase of imperfection,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Not to have known what pains with death begin?"—</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And, like remorse, the worm will gnaw your skin.</span>
	   </p>
	 </article>

	 <article id="the-cat" epub:type="z3998:poem">
	   <h4 epub:type="title">
		 <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXIV</span>
		 <span epub:type="subtitle">The Cat</span>
	   </h4>
	   <p>
		 <span>Come, my fine cat, against my loving heart;</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Sheathe your sharp claws, and settle.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And let my eyes into your pupils dart</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Where agate sparks with metal.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Now while my fingertips caress at leisure</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Your head and wiry curves,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And that my hand's elated with the pleasure</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Of your electric nerves,</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>I think about my woman—how her glances</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Like yours, dear beast, deep-down</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And cold, can cut and wound one as with lances;</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Then, too, she has that vagrant</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And subtle air of danger that makes fragrant</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Her body, lithe and brown.</span>
	   </p>
	 </article>

	 <article id="duel" epub:type="z3998:poem">
	   <h4 epub:type="title">
		 <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXV</span>
		 <span epub:type="subtitle">Duel</span>
	   </h4>
	   <p>
		 <span>Two fighters rushed together: sabres bleak</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>With crimson blood-gouts lit the air above.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>That clinking swordplay was the tender squeak</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Of youth, when it's a prey to bleating love.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>The swords are splintered, like our youth, my darling,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And now it's teeth and talons are the fashion.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>The clash of swords is child's play to the snarling</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Of hearts adult in ulcerated passion.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>In the ravine by lynx and leopard haunted,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Our heroes, wrestling heroes, roll undaunted.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Rags of their skin flower red upon the gorse.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>This gulf is hell, and peopled by our friends.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Here, hellcat! Come, let's roll without remorse</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>To celebrate a feud that never ends!</span>
	   </p>
	 </article>

	 <article id="the-balcony" epub:type="z3998:poem">
	   <h4 epub:type="title">
		 <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXVI</span>
		 <span epub:type="subtitle">The Balcony</span>
	   </h4>
	   <p>
		 <span>Mother of memories, queen of paramours,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Yourself are all my pleasure, all my duty;</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>You will recall caresses that were yours</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And fireside evenings in their warmth and beauty.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Mother of memories, queen of paramours.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>On eves illumined by the light of coal,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>The balcony beneath a rose-veiled sky,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Your breast how soft! Your heart how good and whole!</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>We spoke eternal things that cannot die—</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>On eves illumined by the light of coal!</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>How splendid sets the sun of a warm evening!</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>How deep is space! the heart how full of power!</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>When, queen of the adored, towards you leaning,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>I breathed the perfume of your blood in flower.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>How splendid sets the sun of a warm evening!</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>The evening like an alcove seemed to thicken,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And as my eyes astrologised your own,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Drinking your breath, I felt sweet poisons quicken,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And in my hands your feet slept still as stone.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>The evening like an alcove seemed to thicken.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>I know how to resuscitate dead minutes.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>I see my past, its face hid in your knees.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>How can I seek your languorous charm save in its</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Own source, your heart and body formed to please.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>I know how to resuscitate dead minutes.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>These vows, these perfumes, and these countless kisses,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Reborn from gulfs that we could never sound,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Will they, like suns, once bathed in those abysses,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Rejuvenated from the deep, rebound—</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>These vows, these perfumes, and these countless kisses?</span>
	   </p>
	 </article>

	 <article id="the-possessed" epub:type="z3998:poem">
	   <h4 epub:type="title">
		 <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXVII</span>
		 <span epub:type="subtitle">The Possessed</span>
	   </h4>
	   <p>
		 <span>The sun in crêpe has muffled up his fire.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Moon of my life! Half shade yourself like him.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Slumber or smoke. Be silent and be dim,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And in the gulf of boredom plunge entire;</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>I love you thus! However, if you like,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Like some bright star from its eclipse emerging,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>To flaunt with Folly where the crowds are surging—</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Flash, lovely dagger, from your sheath and strike!</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Light up your eyes from chandeliers of glass!</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Light up the lustful looks of louts that pass!</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Morbid or petulant, I thrill before you.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Be what you will, black night or crimson dawn;</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>No fibre of my body tautly-drawn,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>But cries: "Beloved demon, I adore you!"</span>
	 </p>
	 </article>

	 <article id="a-phantom" epub:type="z3998:poem">
	   <h4 epub:type="title">
		 <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXVIII</span>
		 <span epub:type="subtitle">A Phantom</span>
	   </h4>
	   <section>
		 <h5 epub:type="title">
		   <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>
		   <span epub:type="subtitle">The Shades</span>
		 </h5>
		 <p>
		   <span>My fate confines me, dark and shady,</span>
		   <br/>
		   <span>In vaults of lone unfathomed grief.</span>
		   <br/>
		   <span>No rosy sunbeams bring relief.</span>
		   <br/>
		   <span>Alone with Night, my grim landlady,</span>
		 </p>
		 <p>
		   <span>I'm like a painter whom God spites</span>
		   <br/>
		   <span>To paint on shades, and cook and eat</span>
		   <br/>
		   <span>My own poor heart, the only meat</span>
		   <br/>
		   <span>Of my funereal appetites.</span>
		 </p>
		 <p>
		   <span>Sometimes a spectre dim, reclining</span>
		   <br/>
		   <span>In grace and glory, can be seen.</span>
		   <br/>
		   <span>With dreamy oriental mien.</span>
		 </p>
		 <p>
		   <span>When fully its own form defining,</span>
		   <br/>
		   <span>I recognise who it must be,</span>
		   <br/>
		   <span>Sombre yet luminous, it's She!</span>
		 </p>
	   </section>
	   <section>
		 <h5 epub:type="title">
		   <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>
		   <span epub:type="subtitle">The Perfume</span>
		 </h5>
		 <p>
		   <span>Reader, say, have you ever breathed,</span>
		   <br/>
		   <span>With lazy greed and joy, the dusk</span>
		   <br/>
		   <span>Of an old church with incense wreathed,</span>
		   <br/>
		   <span>Or smelt an ancient bag of musk?</span>
		 </p>
		 <p>
		   <span>It's by such charms the Nevermore</span>
		   <br/>
		   <span>Intoxicates us in the Now—</span>
		   <br/>
		   <span>As lover to Remembrance bow</span>
		   <br/>
		   <span>Over the bodies they adore.</span>
		 </p>
		 <p>
		   <span>From her thick tresses as they fume</span>
		   <br/>
		   <span>(Scent-sack and censer of the room)</span>
		   <br/>
		   <span>A feline, tawny perfume springs.</span>
		 </p>
		 <p>
		   <span>Her muslins and her velvets smooth</span>
		   <br/>
		   <span>Give off, made pregnant with her youth,</span>
		   <br/>
		   <span>Scents of the fur of prowling things.</span>
		 </p>
	   </section>
	   <section>
		 <h5 epub:type="title">
		   <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>
		   <span epub:type="subtitle">The Frame</span>
		 </h5>
		 <p>
		   <span>As a fine frame improves a plate</span>
		   <br/>
		   <span>Although the graver needs no vaunting—</span>
		   <br/>
		   <span>I know not what strange and haunting</span>
		   <br/>
		   <span>(From nature vast to isolate</span>
		 </p>
		 <p>
		   <span>Her beauty) was conferred by gems,</span>
		   <br/>
		   <span>Metals, and gear. She mingled with them,</span>
		   <br/>
		   <span>And swirled them all into her rhythm</span>
		   <br/>
		   <span>As in her skirts the flouncing hems.</span>
		 </p>
		 <p>
		   <span>They say she thought all things were stung</span>
		   <br/>
		   <span>With love for her. Her naked flesh</span>
		   <br/>
		   <span>She loved to drown in kisses fresh</span>
		 </p>
		 <p>
		   <span>Of flax or satin. To her clung,</span>
		   <br/>
		   <span>In all the movements of her shape,</span>
		   <br/>
		   <span>The childish graces of the ape.</span>
		 </p>
	   </section>
	   <section>
		 <h5 epub:type="title">
		   <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>
		   <span epub:type="subtitle">The Portrait</span>
		 </h5>
		 <p>
		   <span>Sickness and death will form the ash and dust</span>
		   <br/>
		   <span>Of all the fire we blazed with in such splendour,</span>
		   <br/>
		   <span>Of those great eyes so fervent and so tender,</span>
		   <br/>
		   <span>The mouth wherein my heart would drown its lust,</span>
		 </p>
		 <p>
		   <span>The kisses strong as marum, the delightful,</span>
		   <br/>
		   <span>Fierce transports livelier than the solar rays.</span>
		   <br/>
		   <span>What can remain? My soul, the truth is frightful!—</span>
		   <br/>
		   <span>A fading sketch, a faint three-coloured haze,</span>
		 </p>
		 <p>
		   <span>Which (like myself unfriended) wanes away,</span>
		   <br/>
		   <span>While Time, insulting dotard, every day,</span>
		   <br/>
		   <span>Brushes it fainter with his heedless wing …</span>
		 </p>
		 <p>
		   <span>Killer of life and art! black, evil King!—</span>
		   <br/>
		   <span>You'll never kill, within my soul, the story</span>
		   <br/>
		   <span>Of that which was my rapture and my glory.</span>
		 </p>
	   </section>
	 </article>

	 <article id="for-you-this-poem" epub:type="z3998:poem">
	   <h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XXXIX</h4>
	   <p>
		 <span>For you this poem: if my name should reach</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Favoured by mighty gales, to far-off times,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Like a proud vessel sailing to the beach,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>To stir the brains of humans with my rhymes—</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Your memory, uncertain as a myth,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Will tire the reader like an endless gong,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And be a mystic, kindred chain wherewith</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>He'll hang suspended to my towering song:</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Curs'd soul to whom (from the supernal sky</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>To hell's abysm) none responds but I!—</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>O you, who like a fleeting shadow pass,</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Spurn with light foot and with serenest gaze</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>The stupid mortals who have grudged you praise,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>O jade-eyed statue, angel browed with brass!</span>
	   </p>
	 </article>

	 <article id="semper-eadem" epub:type="z3998:poem">
	   <h4 epub:type="title">
		 <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XL</span>
		 <span epub:type="subtitle">Semper Eadem</span>
	   </h4>
	   <p>
		 <span>"Whence," ask you, "does this strange new sadness flow</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Like rising tides on rocks, black, bare, and vast?"</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>For human hearts, when vintage-time is past,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>To live is bad. That secret all men know—</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>An obvious sorrow, with no mystery, shown,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Clear as your joy, to everyone around.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>O curious one, seek nothing more profound,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And speak not, though your voice be sweet in tone.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Hush, ignorant! Hush, soul that's still enraptured,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And mouth of childish laughter! Neatly captured,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Death pulls us, more than life, with subtle wile.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Oh let my thought get drunk upon a lie,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And plunge, as in a dream, in either eye,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And in their lashes' shadow sleep awhile!</span>
	   </p>
	 </article>

	 <article id="all-in-one" epub:type="z3998:poem">
	   <h4 epub:type="title">
		 <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLI</span>
		 <span epub:type="subtitle">All in One</span>
	   </h4>
	   <p>
		 <span>The Demon called on me this morning,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>In my high room. As is his way,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Thinking to catch me without warning,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>He put this question: "Tell me, pray,</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Of all the beauties that compose,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>The strange enchantment of her ways,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Amongst the wonders black or rose,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Which object most excites your praise,</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>And is the climax in her litany?"</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>My soul, you answered the Abhorred,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>"Since she is fashioned, all, of dittany,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>No part is most to be adored.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Since I am ravished, I ignore a</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Degree of difference in delight.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>She dazzles me like the aurora</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And she consoles me like the night.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>The harmony's so exquisite</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>That governs her, it is in vain</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Analysis would try to split</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>The unity of such a strain.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>O mystic fusion that, enwreathing</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>My senses, fuses each in each,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>To hear the music of her breathing</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And breathe the perfume of her speech."</span>
	   </p>
	 </article>

	 <article id="what-can-you-say" epub:type="z3998:poem">
	   <h4 epub:type="z3998:roman">XLII</h4>
	   <p>
		 <span>What can you say, poor lonely soul of mine,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Or you, poor heart, so long ago turned sour,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>To the best, dearest, loveliest, whose divine</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Regard has made you open like a flower?</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>We'll set our pride to sing her highest praise:</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Naught to her sweet authority compares:</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Her psychic flesh is formed of fragrant airs.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Her glances clothe us in a suit of rays.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Be it in solitude at dead of night,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Or in the crowded streets of glaring light,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Her phantom like a torch before me streams.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>It speaks: "I'm beautiful. These orders take.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Love naught but Beauty, always, for my sake,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Madonna, guardian Angel, Muse of dreams."</span>
	   </p>
	 </article>

	 <article id="the-living-torch" epub:type="z3998:poem">
	   <h4 epub:type="title">
		 <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLIII</span>
		 <span epub:type="subtitle">The Living Torch</span>
	   </h4>
	   <p>
		 <span>Those lit eyes go before me, in full view,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>(Some cunning angel magnetised their light)—</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Heavenly twins, yet my own brothers too,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Shaking their diamond blaze into my sight.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>My steps from every trap or sin to save,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>In the strait road of Beauty they conduct me.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>They are my servants, and I am their slave,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Obedient in whatever they instruct me.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Delightful eyes, you burn with mystic rays</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Like candles in broad day; red suns may blaze,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>But cannot quench their still, fantastic light.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Those candles burn for death, but you for waking:</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>You sing the dawn that in my soul is breaking,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Stars which no sun could ever put to flight!</span>
	   </p>
	 </article>

	 <article id="reversibility" epub:type="z3998:poem">
	   <h4 epub:type="title">
		 <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XLIV</span>
		 <span epub:type="subtitle">Reversibility</span>
	   </h4>
	   <p>
		 <span>Angel of gaiety, have you known anguish,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Shame and remorse, tears, boredom, and dismay,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Vague horrors of the nights in which we languish,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Which crumple hearts like papers thrown away?</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Angel of gaiety, have you known anguish?</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Angel of kindness, have you met with hate?</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Fists clenched in gloom, eyes running tears of gall,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>When Vengeance beats his drum to subjugate</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Our faculties, the captain of them all?</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Angel of kindness, have you met with hate?</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Angel of health, have you beheld the Fevers?</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Across pale walls of wards they limp and stumble,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Like exiles wan, with agues, chills, and shivers,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Seeking the scanty sun with lips that mumble.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Angel of health, have you beheld the Fevers?</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Angel of beauty, do you know Old Age,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>The fear of wrinkles, and the dire emotion,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>In eyes we've pierced too long, as on a page,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>To read the secret horror of devotion?</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Angel of beauty do you know Old Age?</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Angel of goodness, radiance, and delight,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>The dying David would have begged to share</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>The emanations of your body bright.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>But all I wish to ask of you is prayer.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Angel of goodness, radiance, and delight.</span>
	   </p>
	 </article>
   </section>
 </body>
</html>


<!--	 <p>
	   <span></span>
	   <br/>
	   <span></span>
	   <br/>
	   <span></span>
	   <br/>
	   <span></span>
	 </p>
-->
