<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
 <head>
	<title>Tableaux Parisiens</title>
	<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
 </head>
 <body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
   <section id="tableaux-parisiens" epub:type="part">
	 <h3 epub:type="title"><i xml:lang="fr">Tableaux Parisiens</i></h3>
	 <article id="the-landscape" epub:type="z3998:poem">
	   <h4 epub:type="title">
		 <span epub:type="z3998:roman">LXXXVI</span>
		 <span epub:type="subtitle">The Landscape</span>
	   </h4>
	   <p>
		 <span>More chasteness to my eclogues it would give,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Sky-high, like old astrologers to live,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>A neighbour of the belfries: and to hear</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Their solemn hymns along the winds career.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>High in my attic, chin in hand, I'd swing</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And watch the workshops as they roar and sing,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>The city's masts—each steeple, tower, and flue—</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And skies that bring eternity to view.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Sweet, through the mist, to see illumed again</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Stars through the azure, lamps behind the pane,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Rivers of carbon irrigate the sky,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And the pale moon pour magic from on high.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>I'd watch three seasons passing by, and then</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>When winter came with dreary snows, I'd pen</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Myself between closed shutters, bolts, and doors,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And build my fairy palaces indoors.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>A dream of blue horizons I would garble</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>With thoughts of fountains weeping on to marble,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Of gardens, kisses, birds that ceaseless sing,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And all the Idyll holds of childhood's spring.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>The riots, brawling past my window-pane,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>From off my desk would not divert my brain.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Because I would be plunged in pleasure still,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Conjuring up the Springtime with my will,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And forcing sunshine from my heart to form,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Of burning thoughts, an atmosphere that's warm.</span>
	   </p>
	 </article>

	 <article id="the-sun" epub:type="z3998:poem">
	   <h4 epub:type="title">
		 <span epub:type="z3998:roman">LXXXVII</span>
		 <span epub:type="subtitle">The Sun</span>
	   </h4>
	   <p>
		 <span>Along the outskirts where, close-sheltering</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Hid lusts, delapidated shutters swing,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>When the sun strikes, redoubling waves of heat</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>On town, and field, and roof, and dusty street—</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>I prowl to air my prowess and kill time,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Stalking, in likely nooks, the odds of rhyme,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Tripping on words like cobbles as I go</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And bumping into lines dreamed long ago.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>This all-providing Sire, foe to chloroses,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Wakes verses in the fields as well as roses</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Evaporates one's cares into the breeze,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Filling with honey brains and hives of bees,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Rejuvenating those who go on crutches</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And bringing youthful joy to all he touches,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Life to those precious harvests he imparts</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>That grow and ripen in our deathless hearts.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Poet-like, through the town he seems to smile</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Ennobling fate for all that is most vile;</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And king-like, without servants or display,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Through hospitals and mansions makes his way.</span>
	   </p>
	 </article>

	 <article id="the-red-haired-beggar-girl" epub:type="z3998:poem">
	   <h4 epub:type="title">
		 <span epub:type="z3998:roman">LXXXVIII</span>
		 <span epub:type="subtitle">The Red-Haired Beggar Girl</span>
	   </h4>
	   <p>
		 <span>White girl with flame-red hair,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Whose garments, here and there,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Give poverty to view,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span class="i1">And beauty too.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>To me, poor puny poet,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Your body, as you show it,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>With freckles on your arms,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span class="i1">Has yet its charms.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>You wear with prouder mien</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Than in Romance a queen</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Her velvet buskins could—</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span class="i1">Your clogs of wood.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>In place of tatters short</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Let some rich robe of court</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Swirl with its silken wheels</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span class="i1">After your heels:</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>In place of stockings holed</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>A dagger made of gold,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>To light the lecher's eye</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span class="i1">Flash on your thigh:</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Let ribbons slip their bows</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And for our sins disclose</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>A breast whose radiance vies</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span class="i1">Even with your eyes.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>To show them further charms</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Let them implore your arms,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And these, rebuking, humble</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span class="i1">Fingers that fumble</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>With proferred pearls aglow</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And sonnets of Belleau,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Which, fettered by your beauty,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span class="i1">They yield in duty.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Riffraff of scullion-rhymers</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Would dedicate their primers</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Under the stairs to view</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span class="i1">Only your shoe.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Each page-boy lucky-starred,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Each marquis, each Ronsard</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Would hang about your bower</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span class="i1">To while an hour.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>You'd count, among your blisses,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Than lilies far more kisses,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And boast, among your flames,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span class="i1">Some royal names.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Yet now your beauty begs</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>For scraps on floors, and dregs</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Else destined to the gutter,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span class="i1">As bread and butter.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>You eye, with longing tense,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Cheap gauds for thirty cents,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Which, pardon me, these days</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span class="i1">I cannot raise.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>No scent, or pearl, or stone,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>But nothing save your own</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Thin nudity for dower,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span class="i1">Pass on, my flower!</span>
	   </p>
	 </article>

	 <article id="the-swan" epub:type="z3998:poem">
	   <header>
		 <h4 epub:type="title">
		   <span epub:type="z3998:roman">LXXXIX</span>
		   <span epub:type="subtitle">The Swan</span>
		 </h4>
		 <p epub:type="dedication">To Victor Hugo</p>
	   </header>
	   <h5 epub:type="z3998:roman">I</h5>
	   <p>
		 <span>Andromanche!—This shallow stream, the brief</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Mirror you once so grandly overcharged</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>With your vast majesty of widowed grief,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>This lying Simoïs your tears enlarged,</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Evoked your name, and made me think of you,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>As I was crossing the new Carrousel.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>—Old Paris is no more (cities renew,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Quicker than human hearts, their changing spell).</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>In mind I see that camp of huts, the muddle</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Of rough-hewn roofs and leaning shafts for miles,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>The grass, green logs stagnating in the puddle,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Where bric-a-brac lay glittering in piles.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Once a menagerie parked there. And there</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>It chanced one morning, when from slumber freed,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Labour stands up, and Transport through still air</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Rumbles its sombre hurricane of speed,—</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>A swan escaped its cage: and as its feet</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>With finny palms on the harsh pavement scraped,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Trailing white plumage on the stony street,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>In the dry gutter for fresh water gaped.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Nervously bathing in the dust, in wonder</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>It asked, remembering its native stream,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>"When will the rain come down? When roll the thunder?"</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>I see it now, strange myth and fatal theme!</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Sometimes, like Ovid's wretch, towards the sky</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>(Ironically blue with cruel smile)</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Its neck, convulsive, reared its head on high</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>As though it were its Maker to revile.</span>
	   </p>
	   <h5 epub:type="z3998:roman">II</h5>
	   <p>
		 <span>Paris has changed, but in my grief no change.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>New palaces and scaffoldings and blocks,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>To me, are allegories, nothing strange.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>My memories are heavier than rocks.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Passing the Louvre, one image makes me sad:</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>That swan, like other exiles that we knew,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Grandly absurd, with gestures of the mad,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Gnawed by one craving!—Then I think of you,</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Who fell from your great husband's arms, to be</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>A beast of freight for Pyrrhus, and for life,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Bowed by an empty tomb in ecstacy—</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Great Hector's widow! Helenus's wife!</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>I think, too, of the starved and phthisic negress</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Tramping the mud, who seeks, with haggard eye,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>The palms of Africa, and for some egress</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Out of this great black wall of foggy sky:</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Of those who've lost what they cannot recover:</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Of those who slake with tears their lonely hours</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And milk the she-wolf, Sorrow, for their mother:</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And skinny orphans withering like flowers.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>So in the forest of my soul's exile,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Remembrance winds his horn as on he rides.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>I think of sailors stranded on an isle,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Captives, and slaves—and many more besides.</span>
	   </p>
	 </article>

	 <article id="the-seven-old-men" epub:type="z3998:poem">
	   <header>
		 <h4 epub:type="title">
		   <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XC</span>
		   <span epub:type="subtitle">The Seven Old Men</span>
		 </h4>
		 <p epub:type="dedication">To Victor Hugo</p>
	   </header>
	   <p>
		 <span>Ant-seething city, city full of dreams,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Where ghosts by daylight tug the passer's sleeve.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Mystery, like sap, through all its conduit-streams,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Quickens the dread Colossus that they weave.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>One early morning, in the street's sad mud,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Whose houses, by the fog increased in height,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Seemed wharves along a riverside in flood:</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>When with a scene to match the actor's plight,</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Foul yellow mist had filled the whole of space:</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Steeling my nerves to play a hero's part,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>I coaxed my weary soul with me to pace</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>The backstreets shaken by each lumbering cart.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>A wretch appeared whose tattered, yellow clothing,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Matching the colour of the raining skies,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Could make it shower down alms—but for the loathing</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Malevolence that glittered in his eyes.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>The pupils of his eyes, with bile injected,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Seemed with their glance to make the frost more raw.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Stiff as a sword, his long red beard projected,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Like that of Judas, level with his jaw.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>He was not bent, but broken, with the spine</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Forming a sharp right-angle to the straight,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>So that his stick, to finish the design,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Gave him the stature and the crazy gait</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Of a three-footed Jew, or crippled hound.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>He plunged his soles into the slush as though</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>To crush the dead; and to the world around</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Seemed less of an indifferent than a foe.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>His image followed him, (back, stick, and beard</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>In nothing differed) spawned from the same hole,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>A centenarian twin. Both spectres steered</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>With the same gait to the same unknown goal.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>To what foul plot was I exposed? of what</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Humiliating hazard made the jeer?</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>For seven times, (I counted) was begot</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>This sinister, self multiplying fear!</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Let him mark well who laughs at my despair</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>With no fraternal shudder in reply…</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Those seven loathsome monsters had the air,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Though rotting through, of what can never die.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Disgusting Phoenix, his own sire and father!</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Could I have watched an eight instalment spawn</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Ironic, fateful, grim—nor perished rather?</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>But from that hellish cortege I'd withdrawn.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Perplexed as drunkards when their sight is doubled,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>I locked my room, sick, fevered, chilled with fright:</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>With all my spirit sorely hurt and troubled</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>By so ridiculous yet strange a sight.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Vainly my reason for the helm was striving:</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>The tempest of my efforts made a scorn.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>My soul like a dismasted wreck went driving</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Over a monstrous sea without a bourn.</span>
	   </p>
	 </article>

	 <article id="the-little-old-women" epub:type="z3998:poem">
	   <header>
		 <h4 epub:type="title">
		   <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XCI</span>
		   <span epub:type="subtitle">The Little Old Women</span>
		 </h4>
		 <p epub:type="dedication">To Victor Hugo</p>
	   </header>
	   <h5 epub:type="z3998:roman">I</h5>
	   <p>
		 <span>In sinuous folds of cities old and grim,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Where all things, even horror, turn to grace,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>I follow, in obedience to my whim,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Strange, feeble, charming creatures round the place.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>These crooked freaks were women in their pride,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Fair Eponine or Laïs! Humped and bent,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Love them! Because they still have souls inside.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Under their draughty skirts in tatters rent,</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>They crawl: a vicious wind their carrion rides;</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>From the deep roar of traffic see them cower,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Pressing like precious relics to their sides</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Some satchel stitched with mottoes or a flower.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>They trot like marionettes along the level,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Or drag themselves like wounded deer, poor crones!</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Or dance, against their will, as if the devil</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Were swinging in the belfry of their bones.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Cracked though they are, their eyes are sharp as drills</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And shine, like pools of water in the night,—</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>The eyes of little girls whom wonder thrills</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>To laugh at all that sparkles and is bright.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>The coffins of old women very often</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Are near as small as those of children are.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Wise Death, who makes a symbol of a coffin</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Displays a taste both charming and bizarre.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>And when I track some feeble phantom fleeing</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Through Paris's immense ant-swarming Babel,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>I always think that such a fragile being</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Is moving softly to another cradle.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Unless, sometimes, in geometric mood,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>To see the strange deformities they offer,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>I muse how often he who saws the wood</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Must change the shape and outline of the coffer.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Those eyes are wells a million teardrops feed,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Crucibles spangled by a cooling ore,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Invincible in charm to all that breed</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Austere Misfortune suckled with her lore.</span>
	   </p>
	   <h5 epub:type="z3998:roman">II</h5>
	   <p>
		 <span>Vestal whom old Frascati could enamour:</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Thalia's nun, whose name was only known</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>To her dead prompter: madcap full of glamour</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Whom Tivoli once sheltered as its own—</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>They all elate me. But of these a few,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Of sorrow having made a honeyed leaven,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Say to Devotion, "Lend me wings anew,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>O powerful Hippogriff, and fly to heaven."</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>One for her fatherland a martyr: one</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>By her own husband wronged beyond belief:</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And one a pierced Madonna through her son—</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>They all could make a river with their grief.</span>
	   </p>
	   <h5 epub:type="z3998:roman">III</h5>
	   <p>
		 <span>Yes, I have followed them, time and again!</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>One, I recall, when sunset, like a heart,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Bled through the sky from wounds of ruddy stain,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Pensively sat upon a seat apart,</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>To listen to the music, rich in metal,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>That's played by bands of soldiers in the parks</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>On golden, soul-reviving eyes, to fettle,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>From meek civilian hearts, heroic sparks.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>This one was straight and stiff, in carriage regal,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>She breathed the warrior-music through her teeth,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Opened her eye like that of an old eagle,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And bared a forehead moulded for a wreath.</span>
	   </p>
	   <h5 epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</h5>
	   <p>
		 <span>Thus, then, you journey, uncomplaining, stoic</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Across the strife of modern cities flung,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Sad mothers, courtesans, or saints heroic,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Whose names of old were heard on every tongue,</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>You once were grace, and you were glory once.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>None know you now. Derisory advances</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Some drunkard makes you, mixed with worse affronts</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And on your heels a child-tormentor prances.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>But I who watch you tenderly: and measure</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>With anxious eye, your weak unsteady gait</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>As would a father—get a secret pleasure</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>On your account, as on your steps I wait.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>I see your passionate and virgin crazes;</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Sombre or bright, I see your vanished prime;</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>My soul, resplendent with your virtue, blazes,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>And revels in your vices and your crimes.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Poor wrecks! My family! Kindred in mind, you</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Receive from me each day my last addresses.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Eighty-year Eves, will yet tomorrow find you</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>On whom the claw of God so fiercely presses?</span>
	   </p>
	 </article>

	 <article id="the-blind" epub:type="z3998:poem">
	   <h4 epub:type="title">
		 <span epub:type="z3998:roman">XCII</span>
		 <span epub:type="subtitle">The Blind</span>
	   </h4>
	   <p>
		 <span>My soul, survey them, dreadful as they seem.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Like marionettes, ridiculous they stare.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Strange as somnabulists that, in their dream,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Dart shadowy orbs around we know not where.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>Their eyes, from which the heavenly spark has flown,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Remain uplifted, as in distant quest,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Skyward: but never on the paving stone</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Do they pore dreamingly or come to rest.</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>They traverse thus the illimitable Dark,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Twin of eternal Silence. While the City</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>May sing around us, bellow, laugh, or bark,—</span>
	   </p>
	   <p>
		 <span>By pleasure blinded even to horror, I,</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Too, drag my way, but, more a thing of pity.</span>
		 <br/>
		 <span>Ask what the Blind are seeking there on high.</span>
	   </p>
	 </article>
   </section>
 </body>
</html>


<!-- 
4 line stanza
	 <p>
	   <span></span>
	   <br/>
	   <span></span>
	   <br/>
	   <span></span>
	   <br/>
	   <span></span>
	 </p>

8 line stanza
	   <p>
		 <span></span>
		 <br/>
		 <span></span>
		 <br/>
		 <span></span>
		 <br/>
		 <span></span>
		 <br/>
		 <span></span>
		 <br/>
		 <span></span>
		 <br/>
		 <span></span>
		 <br/>
		 <span></span>
	   </p>
-->
